Script episode (#20)
carpentries-incubator/cwl-novice-tutorial: _episodes/script.md

---
title: "Adding your own script to a step"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How to include and run a script in a step at runtime?"
- "Which requirements need to be specified?"
- "How to capture output of a script?"
objectives:
- "Include and run a script in a step at runtime"
- "Capture output of a script"
keypoints:
- "First key point. Brief Answer to questions. (FIXME)"
---

By the end of this episode,
learners should be able to
__include and run their own script in a step at runtime__

> > ## Exercise 1:
> >
> > Identify `requirements` for the `CommandLineTool`. HINT: `'ubuntu:latest'` can be used as docker container.

Reviewer: Can you set up the exercise a bit more? Maybe show the script here?

```suggestion
> ## Exercise 1:
>
> Identify `requirements` for the `CommandLineTool`. HINT: `'debian:stable'` is a good default software container.
```

>

> > > ## Solution

Reviewer: Ideally the solution would be a compete CWL file, even if it does nothing.

Author: I have updated exercises and solution to include as much CWL code as possible to provide clarity and context.
One thing I am a bit sceptical is if this would be overwhelming for the novices. Feedback welcome.

> > 
> > requirements:
> >    DockerRequirement:
> >      dockerPull: 'ubuntu:latest'

> > >    InlineJavascriptRequirement: {}
> > >    InitialWorkDirRequirement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
These aren't needed yet

> > 
> {: .solution}

> {: .challenge}

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this is the right place for an exercise on task requirements? To me, this doesn't seem specific to adding a script to a workflow. Might it fit better in a different section of the tutorial, dedicated to discussion of requirements and containers? (This is a question for @mr-c too.)

Reviewer 2: Regardless of the appropriate location, "code and run" exercises like this are very challenging for novices. I might prefer a fill-in-the-blanks approach e.g.

```
> ## Exercise 1:
>
> Complete the `requirements` field below to specify that the task should use 
> the `'ubuntu:latest'` Docker container.
>
> ~~~
> requirements:
>    ___:
>      ___
>    InlineJavascriptRequirement: {}
>    InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > requirements:
> >    DockerRequirement:
> >      dockerPull: 'ubuntu:latest'
> >    InlineJavascriptRequirement: {}
> >    InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-yaml }
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}
```

Reviewer: > I wonder if this is the right place for an exercise on task requirements? 

Yeah, we could even skip the `DockerRequirement` for now.

Author: Tried resolving with [87bffd9](https://github.com/common-workflow-lab/cwl-novice-tutorial/pull/20/commits/87bffd9ac5a49b64e278804920d44f6edc34b91f). I have rephrased to clarify `DockerRequirement` has already been filled in as a HINT.
I think `InitialWorkDirRequirment` is directly related to including/writing a script. Hence an exercise on this will be useful.

> ## Exercise 2:
> 
> Create an input field (with appropriate `type`) that is going to be referred within the script.
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > inputs:
> >   message:
> >     type: string
> > 
> {: .solution}

> {: .challenge}

Reviewer 2: I suggest to move this exercise after the next, as at this stage a learner may not know what kind of input the script expects. The next exercise makes clear that `echo` will be used on a message input.

Similar to my comment on the first exercise, I am not sure an exercise on inputs is best placed here.

Author: I have revamped the exercises to only focus on concepts linked to the objectives of this exercise.
Removed exercise 2 and added a new one in [36e137d](https://github.com/common-workflow-lab/cwl-novice-tutorial/pull/20/commits/36e137d8102d6bad6b8cbf3a3d82ac39dd0c03e2)

> ## Exercise 3:
>
> Define name and content of the script (in this exercise we will create a bash script that uses `echo` on the input `message`)
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> >   listing:
> >     - entryname: script.sh
> >       entry: |
> >         echo "*Documenting input*" && \
> >         echo "Input received: $(inputs.message)" && \
> >         echo "Exit"
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 5:
> 
> Since we are using `echo` in the script - what is the apprproiate `CWL` feature to capture standard output?
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > stdout: "message.txt"
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 6:
> 
> Create an output variable to capture this tools' output and identify an appropriate `type` for it.
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > outputs:
> >   doc:
> >     type: stdout
> >
> {: .solution}

> {: .challenge}

Reviewer 2: I suspect this one would also be difficult for a novice. A fill-in-the-blanks, or some other format that provides some structure for the learner to start from, would help guide them to focus on the concept of capturing output and documenting its type.

Author: Updated this exercise to use fill in the blank type question [36e137d](https://github.com/common-workflow-lab/cwl-novice-tutorial/pull/20/commits/36e137d8102d6bad6b8cbf3a3d82ac39dd0c03e2)

> ## Exercise 7:
>
> Specify the `baseCommand` required to execute the script.
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > baseCommand: ["sh", "script.sh"]
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 8:
>

> > How can we capture the script we have created along with tools' standard output using `outputs` section.

Reviewer 2: I would like to see the exercise provided with a partial solution to adapt. You could provide the learner with the `outputs` section written to capture the stdout output, and ask them to extend it to also capture the script?

Author: Done under [36e137d](https://github.com/common-workflow-lab/cwl-novice-tutorial/pull/20/commits/36e137d8102d6bad6b8cbf3a3d82ac39dd0c03e2).

>
> > ## Solution:
> > outputs:
> >   script:
> >     type: File
> >     outputBinding:

> > >       glob: "*.sh"

Reviewer 2: Does this need to be done with a wildcard if we know the name of the script from Exercise 3 above?

Author: I have simplified it by directly using script name.

---
title: "Adding your own script to a step"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How to include and run a script in a step at runtime?"
- "Which requirements need to be specified?"
- "How to capture output of a script?"
objectives:
- "Include and run a script in a step at runtime"
- "Capture output of a script"
keypoints:
- "First key point. Brief Answer to questions. (FIXME)"
---

By the end of this episode,
learners should be able to
__include and run their own script in a step at runtime__

> ## Exercise 1:
>
> Complete the `requirements` field for the `CommandLineTool` that creates a script at runtime. As a HINT, `DockerRequirement` has already been filled-in.
>
> class: CommandLineTool
> cwlVersion: v1.1
> requirements:
>   DockerRequirement:
>     dockerPull: 'debian:stable'
>   -----------------:
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > class: CommandLineTool
> > cwlVersion: v1.1
> > requirements:
> >    DockerRequirement:
> >      dockerPull: 'debian:stable'
> >    InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 2:
>
> Identify `CWL` keywords for defining script name `script.sh` and the contents of this script under `InitialWorkDirRequirement`.
>

> > InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> >   listing:
> >     - ------: script.sh
> >       ------: |
> >         echo "*Documenting input*" && \
> >         echo "Input received: $(inputs.message)" && \
> >         echo "Exit"
> >
> > inputs:
> >   message:
> >     type: string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ~~~
> InitialWorkDirRequirement:
>   listing:
>     - ------: script.sh
>       ------: |
>         echo "*Documenting input*" && \
>         echo "Input received: $(inputs.message)" && \
>         echo "Exit"
>
> inputs:
>   message:
>     type: string
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
```

To be formatted as code blocks with syntax highlighting, you should wrap all example code in `~~~`, with a `{: .language-yaml}` tag after the closing set of `~~~`. Example above

Reviewer 2: Suggesting `language-yaml` because I don't think Rouge has a more specific lexer for CWL. Is that right @mr-c?

Reviewer: Correct, there is no CWL support in Rouge yet

>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > class: CommandLineTool
> > cwlVersion: v1.1
> > requirements:
> >    DockerRequirement:
> >
> > InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> >   listing:
> >     - entryname: script.sh
> >       entry: |
> >         echo "*Documenting input*" && \
> >         echo "Input received: $(inputs.message)" && \
> >         echo "Exit"
> >
> > inputs:
> >   message:
> >     type: string
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 3:
> 

> > Since we are using `echo` in the script (as shown below) - what is the apprproiate `type` in the `outputs` section of following code block to capture standard output?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Since we are using `echo` in the script (as shown below) - what is the appropriate `type` in the `outputs` section of following code block to capture standard output?
```

Typo fix

---
title: "Adding your own script to a step"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How to include and run a script in a step at runtime?"
- "Which requirements need to be specified?"
- "How to capture output of a script?"
objectives:
- "Include and run a script in a step at runtime"
- "Capture output of a script"
keypoints:
- "First key point. Brief Answer to questions. (FIXME)"
---

By the end of this episode,
learners should be able to
__include and run their own script in a step at runtime__

> ## Exercise 1:
>
> Complete the `requirements` field for the `CommandLineTool` that creates a script at runtime. As a HINT, `DockerRequirement` has already been filled-in.
>
> ~~~
> class: CommandLineTool
> cwlVersion: v1.1
> requirements:
>   DockerRequirement:
>     dockerPull: 'debian:stable'
>   -----------------:
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > class: CommandLineTool
> > cwlVersion: v1.1
> > requirements:
> >    DockerRequirement:
> >      dockerPull: 'debian:stable'

> > >    InitialWorkDirRequirement:

Reviewer: The student was asked to 

> Complete the `requirements` field for the `CommandLineTool` that creates a script at runtime

How does this answer speak to that request? It seems incomplete.

Maybe just ask: "Which `Requirement` is used to create a script at runtime?" and offer multiple choices to choose from.

Author: This exercise tries to check if the student knows `InitialWorkDirRequirement` is _required_ to create a script at runtime.
I have used fill in the blank option here to try use different format for questions?

Author: @mr-c - would you suggest updating this bit before approving my PR?

> > ~~~
> > {: .language-yaml }
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 2:
>

> > Identify `CWL` keywords for defining script name `script.sh` and the contents of this script under `InitialWorkDirRequirement`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Using the template below, add the missing instructions so that a script named `script.sh` with the specified contents is created at runtime.
```

> >         echo "Exit"
> >
> > inputs:
> >   message:
> >     type: string
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-yaml }
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 3:
>
> Since we are using `echo` in the script (as shown below) - what is the appropriate `type` in the `outputs` section of following code block to capture standard output?
>
> ~~~
> class: CommandLineTool
> cwlVersion: v1.1
> requirements:
>   DockerRequirement:
>     dockerPull: 'debian:stable'
>   InitialWorkDirRequirement:
>     listing:
>       - entryname: script.sh
>         entry: |
>           echo "*Documenting input*" && \
>           echo "Input received: $(inputs.message)" && \
>           echo "Exit"
>
> inputs:
>   message:
>     type: string
>
> stdout: "message.txt"
>
> outputs:
>  message:
>    type: ----
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
>
> Your options are:
> A. File
> B. Directory
> C. stdout
> D. string
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > C. stdout
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 4:
>
> Fix the `baseCommand` in following code snippet to execute the script we have created in previous exercises.
>
> ~~~
> baseCommand: []
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > ~~~

> > > baseCommand: ["sh", "script.sh"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > baseCommand: [ sh, script.sh ]
```

> > ~~~
> > {: .language-yaml }
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 5:
>

> > CHALLENGE question. Extend the `outputs` section of the following CWLtool definition to capture the script we have created along with tools' standard output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> CHALLENGE question. Extend the `outputs` section of the following CWLtool definition to capture the script we have created along with tools' standard output.
> 
> This will help you inspect the generated script and is useful in more complex situations to troubleshoot related issues.
```

Author: Thank you @mr-c for the great suggestions.

---
title: "Adding your own script to a step"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How to include and run a script in a step at runtime?"
- "Which requirements need to be specified?"
- "How to capture output of a script?"
objectives:
- "Include and run a script in a step at runtime"
- "Capture output of a script"
keypoints:
- "First key point. Brief Answer to questions. (FIXME)"
---

By the end of this episode,
learners should be able to
__include and run their own script in a step at runtime__

> ## Exercise 1:
>

> > Which `Requirment` is used to create a script at runtime? Fill in the blank under `requirements` field below. As a HINT, `DockerRequirement` has already been filled-in.

Reviewer: Thanks! Can you change the exercise to be a multiple choice with `InitialWorkDirRequirement` as the answer instead of fill in the blank?

```suggestion
> Which `Requirment` is used to create a script at runtime?
```

Author: Sure, done under commit [539dc28](https://github.com/common-workflow-lab/cwl-novice-tutorial/pull/20/commits/539dc28791cdec24f3ddfe41cf2000a9d0b16ae8).
Thank you.

> ## Exercise 1:
>
> Complete the `requirements` field for the `CommandLineTool` that creates a script at runtime. As a HINT, `DockerRequirement` has already been filled-in.
>
> ~~~
> class: CommandLineTool
> cwlVersion: v1.1
> requirements:
>   DockerRequirement:
>     dockerPull: 'debian:stable'
>   -----------------:
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > class: CommandLineTool
> > cwlVersion: v1.1
> > requirements:
> >    DockerRequirement:
> >      dockerPull: 'debian:stable'
> >    InitialWorkDirRequirement:
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-yaml }
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Exercise 2:
>
> Identify `CWL` keywords for defining script name `script.sh` and the contents of this script under `InitialWorkDirRequirement`.
>
> ~~~
> InitialWorkDirRequirement:
>   listing:
>     - ------: script.sh
>       ------: |
>         echo "*Documenting input*" && \
>         echo "Input received: $(inputs.message)" && \
>         echo "Exit"
>
> inputs:
>   message:
>     type: string
> ~~~
> {: .language-yaml }
>
> > ## Solution:
> >
> > ~~~
> > class: CommandLineTool
> > cwlVersion: v1.1
> > requirements:

> > >    DockerRequirement:

Reviewer 2: These lines are not present in the code block for the exercise, above. Should they be removed here? Or added in the previous block?

Author: I think it's better to remove these. As these are not required as part of the exercise concept.

Reviewer 2: 👍 If you remove those four lines I think we can get this merged.

Author: Done under this [commit](https://github.com/common-workflow-lab/cwl-novice-tutorial/pull/20/commits/d9e3fe71304b11480f9c4dd48458818aeea2147f)
